Title: Machine Learning Techniques for Optimizing DCO-OFDM in LiFi Communication
Collection: Publications
Permalink: /Publication/Machine-Learning-Techniques-for-Optimizing-DCO-OFDM-in-LiFi-Communication
Date: 2026-07-08
Venue: 'Wireless Personal Communications'
Paperurl: 'https://link-to-paper.com'
Citation: 'Md Al Amin Kazi, Co-Author. (2026). "Machine Learning Techniques for Optimizing DCO-OFDM in LiFi Communication." Wireless Personal Communications.'

Abstract:
DC-biased optical OFDM (DCO-OFDM) is widely adopted in Light Fidelity (LiFi) for its spectral efficiency and intensity modulation compatibility. Optimal DC bias balances clipping noise against power efficiency while insufficient bias degrades BER imposing clipping noise and excessive bias makes the system power inefficient. So, Optimal DC bias implementation and clipping mitigation are required to be simultaneously addressed for a power efficient DCO-OFDM system. Existing analytical and iterative methods for optimal DC bias prediction experience prohibitive computational complexity, while recent machine learning approaches achieve limited prediction accuracy with R-squared scores less than 0.9800 taking 5 features with insufficient validation, limited modulation orders and number of subcarriers. These limitations are addressed through a comprehensive ML framework. Firstly, a 27,720-sample dataset was generated ranging modulation orders from 4 to 4096 and number of subcarriers from 64 to 4096. This dataset is significantly larger than prior works found in literature. Secondly, 42 regression models through LazyPredict algorithms and individually built Polynomial Regression, Multi-Layer Perceptron, Histogram-based Gradient Boosting Regressor model were evaluated systematically. Finally, rigorous multi-faceted validations were conducted for the best predictive model. HGBRegressor achieved prediction accuracy with an R-squared score of 0.9958 and an RMSE of 0.0575 with only two features i.e., using 60% fewer features than previous studies. HGBRegressor provided prediction accuracy with an R-squared score of 0.9991 and an RMSE of 0.0269 for all features. Multi-faceted validations confirmed exceptional K-fold cross-validation stability providing very little variance of 0.0001 in R-squared score, statistical significance in Friedman test with very small p-value of 0.0067, cross-dataset generalization and noise robustness with an R-squared score 0.8114 and 0.9947 for 2 features. Noise robustness showed only 0.11% degradation while using 30% corrupted training data. Multi-Layer Perceptron achieved competitive prediction accuracy with an R-squared score of 0.9807 with two features. This work demonstrates acceptable DC bias prediction with minimal features, establishing deployment-ready ML-based optimization for energy-efficient LiFi systems.
